.TH OSMCTL 1 "2026-05-13" "osmctl" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
osmctl \- command-line client and TUI for OpenStreetMap
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osmctl
.RI [ global-flags ]
.I command
.RI [ args... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osmctl
manages an OpenStreetMap account from the terminal: changesets, element edits,
notes, the private inbox, GPS traces, and a Bubbletea TUI for interactive
browsing and editing. Authentication is OAuth 2.0 with PKCE; tokens persist
in the user config directory.
.PP
The CLI talks to production by default
.RI ( https://api.openstreetmap.org/api/0.6 ).
Override with
.B --api
or
.BR OSM_API_URL ;
the OAuth endpoints are derived from the API host so any instance, including
the sandbox at
.IR master.apis.dev.openstreetmap.org ,
works without further configuration.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B --api \fIURL\fR
API base URL. Overrides
.BR OSM_API_URL .
.TP
.B --client-id \fIID\fR
OAuth2 client id. Overrides
.B OSM_CLIENT_ID
and any value persisted by a previous
.BR "osmctl login" .
.TP
.B -h, --help
Help for any command.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
.TP
.B osmctl login
Run the OAuth2 PKCE flow. Opens a browser, listens on
.BR 127.0.0.1:17654/callback ,
exchanges the authorization code, and writes the token to disk. The first
.B --client-id
used is remembered so later commands don't need it.
.TP
.B osmctl logout
Remove the stored token.
.TP
.B osmctl whoami
Print the authenticated user's display name and id.
.TP
.B osmctl doctor
Show server capabilities and the current token's scopes.
.SH CHANGESETS
.TP
.B osmctl changeset list \fR[\fB--mine\fR] [\fB--format \fITPL\fR]
List changesets. With
.B --mine
limits to the authenticated user.
.B --format
takes a Go
.B text/template
applied per changeset. Fields:
.IR ID ,
.IR User ,
.IR UserID ,
.IR CreatedAt ,
.IR ClosedAt ,
.IR Open ,
.IR ChangesCount ,
.IR MinLat ,
.IR MaxLat ,
.IR MinLon ,
.IR MaxLon ,
.IR CommentsCount ,
.IR Tags .
Methods:
.IR Comment ,
.IR Source ,
.IR CreatedBy ,
.IR Locale ,
.IR ImageryUsed ,
.IR Host ,
.IR Bot .
Template functions:
.BR json ,
.BR csv .
.TP
.B osmctl changeset show \fIID\fR
Show one changeset including its discussion comments.
.TP
.B osmctl changeset download \fIID\fR
Print the raw osmChange XML uploaded in the changeset.
.TP
.B osmctl changeset open \fR[\fB--comment \fITEXT\fR] [\fB--source \fITEXT\fR]
Open a new changeset; prints its id.
.TP
.B osmctl changeset close \fIID\fR
Close an open changeset.
.TP
.B osmctl changeset comment \fIID\fR \fITEXT\fR
Post a discussion comment.
.SH ELEMENT EDITS
The
.B edit
subcommands open a single-purpose changeset, apply one change, then close it.
For multi-edit workflows pass
.B --changeset \fIID\fR
to reuse an already-open changeset (typically one returned by
.BR "osmctl changeset open" ),
or use
.B osmctl tui compose
for the interactive flow.
.TP
.B --comment \fITEXT\fR
Changeset comment. Only valid when opening a new changeset; conflicts with
.BR --changeset .
.TP
.B --changeset \fIID\fR
Reuse an existing open changeset. The edit subcommand skips the open and
close steps; you are responsible for closing the changeset later with
.BR "osmctl changeset close" .
.TP
.B osmctl edit tag \fIKIND\fR \fIID\fR \fIKEY\fR=\fIVAL\fR [\fIKEY\fR=\fIVAL\fR...] [\fB--comment \fITEXT\fR]
Set or update tags. An empty value
.RB ( amenity= )
deletes the key.
.I KIND
is
.BR node ,
.BR way ,
or
.BR relation .
.TP
.B osmctl edit delete \fIKIND\fR \fIID\fR [\fB--comment \fITEXT\fR]
Delete the element.
.TP
.B osmctl history \fIKIND\fR \fIID\fR
Print every version of an element.
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B osmctl note create \fB--lat \fIF\fR \fB--lon \fIF\fR \fITEXT\fR
Create a map note; prints its id.
.TP
.B osmctl note show \fIID\fR
Show a note and its comment thread.
.TP
.B osmctl note comment \fIID\fR \fITEXT\fR
Add a comment.
.TP
.B osmctl note close \fIID\fR [\fITEXT\fR]
Close a note, optionally with a resolution comment.
.TP
.B osmctl note reopen \fIID\fR [\fITEXT\fR]
Reopen a closed note.
.SH MESSAGES
.TP
.B osmctl message inbox \fR[\fB--format \fITPL\fR]
.TQ
.B osmctl message outbox \fR[\fB--format \fITPL\fR]
List inbox or outbox. Fields:
.IR ID ,
.IR FromUser ,
.IR FromUserID ,
.IR ToUser ,
.IR ToUserID ,
.IR SentOn ,
.IR Title ,
.IR BodyFormat ,
.IR Read ,
.IR Deleted .
.I Body
is not returned in listings; fetch with
.BR "osmctl message read" .
Template functions:
.BR date ,
.BR json ,
.BR csv .
.TP
.B osmctl message read \fIID\fR
Show one message including its body.
.TP
.B osmctl message delete \fIID\fR
Delete a message.
.SH TRACES
.TP
.B osmctl trace list
List the authenticated user's uploaded GPX traces.
.TP
.B osmctl trace show \fIID\fR
Show one trace's metadata.
.TP
.B osmctl trace data \fIID\fR
Print the raw GPX file content.
.TP
.B osmctl trace upload \fIFILE\fR \fB--description \fITEXT\fR [\fB--tags \fIT,T\fR] [\fB--visibility \fIV\fR]
Upload a GPX file. Visibility is one of
.BR public ,
.BR trackable ,
.BR identifiable ,
.B private
(default
.BR private ).
.TP
.B osmctl trace update \fIID\fR [\fB--description \fITEXT\fR] [\fB--tags \fIT,T\fR] [\fB--visibility \fIV\fR]
Replace metadata.
.TP
.B osmctl trace delete \fIID\fR
Delete a trace.
.SH MAP
.TP
.B osmctl map \fIL,B,R,T\fR
Download every feature inside the bbox
.RI ( "left,bottom,right,top" )
as osm XML on stdout.
.SH TUI
.TP
.B osmctl tui \fR[\fITARGET\fR [\fIARGS...\fR]]
Open the interactive TUI. Without arguments, lands on the main menu. With a
target, deep-links to that screen:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B profile
\(em your OSM profile.
.IP \(bu 2
.B inbox
or
.B outbox
\(em messages.
.IP \(bu 2
.B changesets
\(em your changesets list.
.IP \(bu 2
.B changeset \fIID\fR
\(em one changeset (elements, diff, XML).
.IP \(bu 2
.B notes
\(em notes lookup.
.IP \(bu 2
.B history \fIKIND\fR \fIID\fR
\(em element version history.
.IP \(bu 2
.B doctor
\(em server capabilities and token scopes.
.IP \(bu 2
.B traces
\(em GPS traces list.
.IP \(bu 2
.B compose
(alias
.BR new )
\(em stage a new changeset for upload.
.RE
.PP
Common keys: \fBesc\fR back, \fBtab\fR swap focus between split panes,
\fB/\fR filter on lists, \fBr\fR refresh. The compose flow lets you add
existing elements by id or create new relations, edit tags and (for relations)
members in a two-pane view, then submit everything as one atomic upload.
.PP
Theme follows the terminal background via
.BR COLORFGBG ;
override with
.BR GLAMOUR_STYLE = light
or
.BR GLAMOUR_STYLE = dark .
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/osm/token.json " (mode 0600)"
OAuth2 access and refresh token. Overridable with
.BR OSM_TOKEN_PATH .
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/osm/config.json
Persisted CLI defaults (currently just the client id). Overridable with
.BR OSM_CONFIG_PATH .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B OSM_CLIENT_ID
OAuth2 client id.
.TP
.B OSM_API_URL
API base URL. Default
.IR https://api.openstreetmap.org/api/0.6 .
.TP
.B OSM_TOKEN_PATH
Token file location.
.TP
.B OSM_CONFIG_PATH
Config file location.
.TP
.B GLAMOUR_STYLE
.B light
or
.BR dark .
Bypasses terminal-bg detection.
.TP
.B COLORFGBG
Read by terminals like xterm, Konsole, and urxvt to publish foreground and
background colors. The TUI parses the last segment to pick a theme when
.B GLAMOUR_STYLE
is unset.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success,
non-zero on failure (network errors, API errors, missing token, ...).
.SH EXAMPLES
First login:
.RS
.EX
$ osmctl \-\-client\-id YOUR_CLIENT_ID login
.EE
.RE
.PP
Rename a node:
.RS
.EX
$ osmctl edit tag node 12345 name="Caf\['e] Z" \-\-comment "rename"
.EE
.RE
.PP
List your last changesets as JSONL:
.RS
.EX
$ osmctl changeset list \-\-mine \-\-format '{{json .}}'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Pipe a CSV report to your spreadsheet:
.RS
.EX
$ osmctl changeset list \-\-mine \-\-format \\
    '{{csv .ID (.CreatedAt.Format "2006-01-02") .User .Comment}}' \\
    > changesets.csv
.EE
.RE
.PP
Open the compose UI:
.RS
.EX
$ osmctl tui compose
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/API_v0.6 ,
.IR https://www.openstreetmap.org/oauth2/applications .
.SH BUGS
Report at
.IR https://github.com/raspbeguy/osm/issues .
